# Aquinas final draft (part 1/1)

   “The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.”    -Henry David Thoreau   “Finally, beloved, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is pleasing, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence and if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things.”    (Phil. 4:8, NRSV)   Aquinas and the Doctrine of Grace In 1741, George Whitefield and John Wesley engaged in a theological dispute over the nature of salvation.  Whitefield , along with English Calvinists, insisted that disciples are justified solely by their faith in Christ’s action on the cross.  Wesley disagreed, arguing that faith in Christ, while crucial, is but a “condition of our salvation.”  Wesley insisted that “faith [will] result in a real change in the believer where, by the grace of God, Christ’s righteousness would be imparted to the person, who would thus not only be accounted righteous but would become righteous (sanctified or holy).” 1  Indeed, Wesley insisted that the test of faith was the presence of peace and joy in the life of the believer. 2  Their dispute lasted until Whitehead’s death three decades later.  Whitehead and many of his clergy colleagues had no patience with Wesley’s doctrine of Christian perfection with its “degrees of faith,” publishing a letter in which he called the centerpiece of Wesleyan theology “a fond conceit.” 3  Wesley, however, was in good company.  Thomas Aquinas  published similar views nearly 470 years earlier.   Completed in 1272, Aquinas’ Summa Theologica  anticipates Wesleyan emphases on the roles of  ‘prevenient” and “sanctifying grace”  that enable and cause a disciple to pursue a virtuous life.  Indeed, Aquinas anticipates much Wesleyan theology, and especially the idea of Christian perfection. Aquinas would have agreed with Wesley’s insistence that love is “the sum of the perfect law [and] the true circumcision of the heart.” 4 He likely would have sympathized  with Wesley’s famous  aphorism that a Methodist “is one who has the  love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost given unto him.” 5  However, Aquinas might have challenged  as too simplistic Wesley’s description of justification as captured in the Wesleyan slogan, “Salvation by Faith.” 6  In Summa Theologica. Aquinas uses an analysis of virtue and sin to show that humans are delivered from a destiny of despair and damnation by Divine grace that moves humans to justice through the interaction of faith and hope that have been perfected by love; furthermore, Aquinas shows that grace thereby makes possible, through participation in the sacramental community, a destiny of fulfillment in eternal blessedness.  In order to understand why Aquinas says that humans are fulfilled by grace through faith and hope perfected by love, this essay will examine first Aquinas’ understanding of the destiny of humankind without grace, explore his concepts of justification, perfection, and then his discussion of the fruits of faith within the sacramental community. The Destiny of Humankind without Grace Humans are driven toward fulfillment.  This premise is the foundation of Aquinas’ theology.  As Augustine said, all humans desire to achieve their “last end, which is happiness” (12ae Q.1, Art. 7).  Humans cannot rest until they have united with “the perfect good”(12ae Q.2, Art. 8).  The will drives ceaselessly towards the ultimate good, just as the intellect is driven to find ultimate truth. Happiness is an ever receding horizon as long as “something remains for [humans] to desire and seek.”   Only God can satisfy this drive, however, for, there will always be something remaining until one reaches  God, who is the ultimate good and the ultimate truth.  Happiness is thus possible only through knowledge of God (12ae Q.2, Art. 8 ).  Yet is it is not enough for humans simply to know that God exists, for the intellect drives ceaselessly “to reach the very Essence of the First Cause.”  Humans must unite with God to find rest. This union with God is the telos of humankind. This fulfillment of human ends is “final perfect happiness” or “blessedness.”  The life of blessedness, therefore, consists of “perfection through union with God” (12ae, Q.3, Art.8).   Adam and Eve enjoyed the life of blessedness before the Fall due to the graciousness of God.  For God, through grace, conferred on the first parents “original justice,” an “inclination to virtue,” and a right ordering of the soul that made virtuous life possible. The gift of the ‘light of grace’ enabled them to know God, and, by loving God rightly, to merit blessedness.   As a result of the Fall, however, humankind lost the gift of original justice, 7 the right ordering of the soul (12ae, Q.81, Art. 2), and the light of grace by which they knew God (12ae, Q. 89, Art. 1).   Humans therefore lost the  possibility of union with God, 8 which means humans lost the hope of eternal rest in God.  Humankind did not lose, however, the inclination to virtue, though sin weakens this natural inclination (12ae, Q.85, Art. 1).  In other words, after the Fall, humans can pursue a virtuous life, and may even live well, but the life of blessedness is no longer possible. The telos of humanity is infinitely distant.  Human destiny consists of the ceaseless striving for a fulfillment that is always beyond reach.   Moreover, human happiness, when achieved, is ephemeral.  For without the right ordering of the soul, the soul’s powers are weakened, making the virtuous life more difficult to achieve and sin more likely.  Prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance give way to ignorance, malice, weakness, and concupiscence. Humans yield to their sensitive appetites rather following reason, resulting in sins and vices that are contrary to human nature (12ae, Q.71, Art. 2).   Due to the natural inclination to virtue, which cannot be destroyed (12ae, Q.85, Art. 1), it is possible for humans to refrain from mortal sin for a time, but humans cannot avoid all venial sin due to “the corruption of [humankind’s] appetite of sensuality.” 9  Indeed, humans can  “avoid each mortal sin...but it cannot be that [a human] remains for a long time without [any] mortal sin” (12ae, Q. 109, Art. 8).  Both venial and mortal sin are unavoidable because the human “heart is not so fixed on God as to be unwilling to be parted from [God]for the sake of finding any good or avoiding any evil” (12ae, Q. 109, Art. 8).  That is, the insatiable drive for fulfillment results in the effort to find fulfillment in concerns that are less than ultimate and that are often evil.  As continued sin weakens the soul, “the reason is obscured, especially in practical matters, the will hardened to evil, [and] good actions become more difficult and concupiscence more impetuous” (12ae, Q.85, Art. 3). Thus, without union with God, humans, in spite of their best intentions and efforts, can not achieve perfectly even the proximate ends of the virtuous life. 10   At best, an imperfect happiness may be achieved (12ae, Q.5, Art. 5), albeit circumscribed by the pathos of estrangement from God and fellow humans wrought by sin. Hence, the human destiny, according to Aquinas, consists of the relentless drive to reach a telos that remains infinitely distant, the frustration of  pursuing less than ultimate passions due to a will no longer obedient to reason, and the persistent pain of penalties  purchased with unavoidable sin.  Moreover, rather than  the eternal rest that is the telos of humanity,  death delivers only the damnation that is the eternally paid price of mortal sin (12ae, Q. 87, Art. 3).   Justification Yet, “the Spirit intercedes with sighs too deep for words” (Rom. 8:26).   It is indeed humankind’s end to rest in eternal blessedness, but it is also the role of  “providence to direct things towards their end.”   Like an archer redirecting an errant arrow back to its proper target, God redirects some humans to eternal blessedness by  granting them operative grace that moves them to will and act towards the good (I,Q. 23, Art. 1  and 12ae, Q.111, Art. 2).   Operative grace moves the will, and the will moves the intellect so that the soul is able to believe God’s promises of immediate salvation  and ultimate fulfillment.  Thus, operative grace makes possible both faith in the immediacy of God’s redemption and  hope for  a future life of eternal blessedness  (22ae, Q. 2, Art.2 and 22ae, Q. 17, Art. 7 ). God thus draws those predestined for eternal blessedness to the Divine good by infusing them with the operating grace that produces the inward habits of faith and hope (12ae, Q.110, Art. 1) that ultimately lead to and are signified by the sacrament of baptism.  Fundamentally, baptism is a new beginning, consisting of both a death and a rebirth, in which the old life dominated by sin passes and a new spiritual life in Christ begins (3, Q.69, Art. 1).   The cleansing with baptismal water signifies that the guilt of sin is washed away, while the reinvigoration of the water signifies the release from the debts of punishment due to sin.  The clearness of baptismal water signifies the purifying infusion of grace that brings about the God-knowing virtues of faith and hope (3, Q.69, Art. 4).  In baptism, the baptized becomes a member of Christ, and thus receives anew the light of grace that makes knowledge of ultimate good and truth  - the vision of God - possible (3, Q. 69, Art. 5).  Thus, the baptized is truly born again in Christ, for she or he is freed from the sins of the past and thrust into a future enlightened and fulfilled by Christ and driven by the “instinct of grace” (3, Q. 69, Art. 5). The infusion of grace during baptism restores the light of grace by which the baptized can follow the Christ and thereby makes virtuous life possible (3, Q. 69, Art. 5).  This renewal produces an outward movement of the free-will, in which grace cooperates, that results in meritorious works (12ae, Q.55, Art. 2).    Such works are meritorious in the sense of congruity with God.  That is, they are actions to which it is just that God respond in affirmation.  For, in turning to good works, the disciple becomes congruent with God, much like a seed, in sprouting, becomes congruent with the tree that produced it. The disciple has no claim  of entitlement to grace from God as a result of good works, but, because it is fitting and in keeping with God’s goodness that God respond to the disciple’s acts of goodness, God affirms her or his good works by perfecting each with the reward of additional grace.  This reward consists, variously, of additional temporal fruits, of a greater “disposition to grace,” and of the development of an affinity for good works  (XP, Q. 14, Art. 4).  Thus, God draws those predestined for eternal blessedness to the faith and hope marked by baptism, and then moves the baptized ever closer to their final end through grace that cooperates with their turn towards the good by positively reinforcing their good works. God causes the baptized to love the Divine Trinity by affirming the developing goodness in their lives.  In other words, baptism marks the beginning of spiritual training through which the disciple is healed and transformed by falling in love with God.   It is in this process of falling in love with God that the predestined are justified.  For the light of grace, given at baptism,  enables the disciple to recognize in God the ultimate good and ultimate truth  - the ultimate fulfillment towards which all humans are driven - and, in that moment of recognition, the disciple’s relentless drive to  unite with ultimate truth is turned towards God.  It is in that moment that the disciple falls in love with God. In that moment, the disciple experiences unconditioned faith in God as Redeemer and unconditioned hope in God’s promise of eternal blessedness. Faith and hope are thereby perfected by love for God (12ae, Q.113, Art. 4, 22ae, Q.7, Art. 2, and 22ae, Q.24, Art. 2).  With the remission of sins and infusion of justifying grace, God’s movement of the soul to God is complete. The disciple is ”subject to God” and the powers of the soul are subject to reason (12ae, Q. 113, Art. 1).  The disciple is thereby moved to justice.  For the intellect rightly recognizes the good in daily life, and the free will, desiring nothing but God eternally,  desires nothing but the good temporally.  The disciple  “draw[s] near to justice” and “recoil[s] from sin” (12ae, Q. 113, Art. 5) because of her or his newfound yearning to unite with all that is good.  This habit of love, given by God’s justifying grace, makes the habit of justice - that is, the morally virtuous life -  possible.  For the principle of the disciple’s life is  thereafter love of the good, and, supported by God’s cooperating grace, the contents of the disciple’s life is thereafter good works.  Because the contents of the disciple’s life is thereafter good works, the form of the disciple’s life is thereafter justice.  The disciple, by loving God rightly, lives rightly. For Aquinas, justification is God’s movement of humans from a life of sin to a life of justice (12ae, Q.113, Art. 3).  Hence, it is by falling in love with God that disciples are justified;  or, more formally: God moves those predestined for eternal blessedness to justice by grace through faith and hope perfected by love. Christian Perfection Yet, for Aquinas, justification is not the end of the disciple’s journey toward God, but rather just the beginning.  Sanctification follows.  Just as baptism is a new birth in Christ, eternal blessedness is maturity in Christ.  The spiritual journey in Christ moves from new birth to maturity in three degrees.  God’s justifying grace infuses the habit of love that drives disciples to the good, but that habit develops in the context of a soul weakened by contrary habits.  The newly justified disciple, whose soul has just been moved by grace from disorder to order, is a spiritual babe whose growth consists principally of “avoiding sin and resisting [her or] his concupiscences” that threaten to destroy the emerging habit of love.   The more experienced disciples, in whom the habit of love is firm and who are proficient in pursuing the good, are spiritual children whose growth consists of “strengthen[ing] their [love] by adding to it.”  Finally, the most experienced disciples are spiritual adolescents approaching maturity, whose growth consists of perfect “union with and enjoyment of God”  (22ae, Q. 24, Art.9).  God cooperates in the growth of all along this spiritual journey by infusing sanctifying grace that enables continued growth in love.   The Fruits of Faith Within the Sacramental Community The fruits of this spiritual journey towards God are peace and joy.  Peace is born of love because love unites, and “peace is the union of the appetite’s inclinations.”  The disciple has peace towards God because all of the disciple’s desires are directed to God. The disciple’s prayer is that God’s will be done, thus there is no conflict of desires.  Similarly, the disciple has peace towards neighbors, because love unites the desires of the disciple with the desires of the neighbor. The disciple desires to fulfill the will of the neighbor (22ae, Q. 29, Art. 3).  Joy, too, is born of love, for love unites the disciple with God, so that  the disciple has moments of rest from the endless search for the ultimate good and truth to which humankind is ordained.  Joy is only partial, however, for “as long as we are in this world, the movement of desire does not cease in us, because it still remains possible...to approach nearer to God by grace” (22ae, Q. 28, Art. 3).  Hence, the spiritual journey is one in which the predestined are blessed with increasing peace and joy in this life as they grow in love, resulting ultimately in eternal rest and blessedness in God. Thus, for Aquinas, a peaceful and joyful life is possible only through the spiritual journey towards God, and that spiritual journey is enabled only by God’s infusion of grace.  Yet God’s grace is received only in the context of the community of the faithful, and indeed, only through appropriate participation in the sacramental life of the community.  For God infuses his grace exclusively through the sacraments.  The sacraments are effective because of the Christ; disciples comprehend the reality of the Christ and obtain the power of the grace given through the Christ solely through the sacraments.   Grace is bestowed solely through the sacraments because humans are embodied creatures whose natural means of comprehending  reality is only through the senses. (3, Q. 62, Art. 1).  Thus, to receive the grace by which God moves humans from sin to justice through faith and hope perfected by love, one must participate in the sacramental life of the community and receive the sacraments properly.  The sacraments are therefore the means of grace.  Moreover, since peace and joy are the fruits of the life of love made possible by the grace infused in the sacramental life of the community, peace and joy are beyond the reach of those outside that community.  A life of peace and joy is possible only within the context of the sacramental community. Conclusion In Summa Theologica, one encounters a brilliant work that remains true to its Augustinian foundation while expanding it with an Aristotelian understanding of the human situation.  In Summa Theologica. Aquinas presents an analysis of virtue and sin to show that humans are delivered from a destiny of despair and damnation by Divine grace that moves humans to justice through the interaction of faith and hope that have been perfected by love; furthermore, Aquinas shows that grace thereby makes possible, through participation in the sacramental community, a destiny of fulfillment in eternal blessedness.  These ideas pre-date the Reformation, yet were influential in later Protestant renewal movements.  Indeed, had Aquinas observed the long debate between John Wesley and his Calvinist detractors, he would have recognized many of his own ideas in those championed by Wesley. Aquinas would have welcomed Wesley’s doctrine of Christian perfection with its three degrees of faith, since both concepts appeared in  his theology.  The same is true of Wesley’s emphasis on the presence of peace and joy as the marks of authentic faith.  Moreover, Aquinas likely would have applauded Wesley’s identification of a disciple as one in whose life “the love of God [is] shed abroad,” because the doctrine that God’s grace moves humans to love of God and neighbor constitutes the centerpiece of Thomist theology.  Thus, there is broad overlap between Wesley and Aquinas.   Yet, given the depth of Aquinas’ thinking, the image of Aquinas overhearing the debate of Wesley and Whitehead is like that of an old sage arbitrating a dispute between adolescents.  The sage brings a much richer and nuanced world-view to the debate.  So it is in the debate about justification.  Whitehead and Wesley share a common Enlightenment theology that treats the gospel as though it is merely good news for individuals about a highway to Heaven or an escape route from Hell to which individual access is granted in exchange for belief in Jesus. While they argue about the details, Whitehead and Wesley share the premise that justification means to be saved individually by grace from going to Hell when one dies. In contrast, Aquinas saw justification as a process along one’s spiritual journey during which the Divine Trinity carried out the Divine will of establishing the Kingdom of God by moving those predestined for eternal blessedness from a state of sin to a state of justice. Aquinas’ depiction is decidedly communitarian and balances  a “here and now” ethics with an eschatological emphasis.  Justification is about renewed and just persons, not escape from Hell.  For Aquinas, justification is only the beginning of a spiritual journey along which a disciple is transformed ethically by falling in love with God and participating in the sacramental community.  It is that process of falling in love with God  and participating in the grace mediated through the sacramental community that defines discipleship. For Aquinas, the disciple, by loving God rightly, lives rightly.  But what does “loving God rightly” mean in the 21st century?  That is the critical question of discipleship, and, indeed, it is the central question around which the pastor’s vocation is organized.  In fact, asking that question and clarifying its possible answers constitute the urgent vocation of pastoral ministry. For when the baptized community lives rightly, it fulfills the hope expressed by Paul in his letter to the Philippians: “And this is my prayer, that your love may overflow more and more with knowledge and full insight to help you to determine what is best, so that in the day of Christ you may be pure and blameless, having produced the harvest of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ for the glory and praise of God.” (Phil. 1:9-11, NRSV)  Aquinas and the Doctrine of Grace Craig David Uffman 1 1 Heitzenrater, Richard P. Wesley and the People Called Methodists. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1995,    107.  2 Ibid., 80-1.  3 Ibid., 121.  4 Ibid., 48.  5 Ibid., 107.  6 Ibid., 220.  7  “Original sin denotes the privation of original justice.”  See 12ae, Q. 82, Art. 1.  8 As a result of the loss of the gift of original justice, humanity also lost the incorruptibility of the body, resulting in the destiny of death. See 12ae, Q.85, Art. 6.    9 Mortal sin occurs when the soul is so disordered by sin as to turn away from God.  Venial sin occurs when the soul is disordered without turning away from God.  See 12ae, Q.72, Art. 5  10 Aquinas differentiates between the proximate and supernatural ends.  Proximate ends are the natural ends of creatures.  Supernatural ends are those beyond the creature’s natural ends.  