# A. Predestination is simply an understanding of one component of providence.  It is that process by which God brings people to eternal life.  It is God's choice of certain individuals to enter into eternal life.  Grace is the means by man is enabled to achieve blessedness.  Predestination is God's providential reason (his will) to give grace to those who he chooses to achieve supernatural ends.  He is choosing who he will give grace so they will achieve merit needed to merit eternal life.  The reason he chooses some and not others preexists in God's mind.  It is the preexistence of God's action in God's mind.  There is no separation between what God wills and what God does.   Note that Aquinas say anything about those damned.  God rejects some, but rejection is "that God permits some men to fail to attain this supernatural end."  Therefore rejection is not based on God's foreknowledge but it is God's will to withhold grace, so that some, without grace, proceed according to nature, they sin, and therefore they bring upon themselves receive justice.  Single predestination.   Pocket veto = killing a bill by vetoing.  Single predestination is similar in that it is God's neglect of some.

A. Predestination is simply an understanding of one component of providence.  It is that process by which God brings people to eternal life.  It is God's choice of certain individuals to enter into eternal life.  Grace is the means by man is enabled to achieve blessedness.  Predestination is God's providential reason (his will) to give grace to those who he chooses to achieve supernatural ends.  He is choosing who he will give grace so they will achieve merit needed to merit eternal life.  The reason he chooses some and not others preexists in God's mind.  It is the preexistence of God's action in God's mind.  There is no separation between what God wills and what God does.   Note that Aquinas say anything about those damned.  God rejects some, but rejection is "that God permits some men to fail to attain this supernatural end."  Therefore rejection is not based on God's foreknowledge but it is God's will to withhold grace, so that some, without grace, proceed according to nature, they sin, and therefore they bring upon themselves receive justice.  Single predestination.   Pocket veto = killing a bill by vetoing.  Single predestination is similar in that it is God's neglect of some.