# Chapter Summary (part 1/1)

 ___ Hence, while, indeed, Aquinas thinks that the way to fulfil truth for fallen man is by imitation of the God-man (as will be discussed in Chapter Three), more generally he supposes that any truth whatsoever is a participation in the eternally uttered Logos.  there is a logical way of being, a way of things existing in the mind, which for Aquinas is as real as their extramental, material existence  For Aquinas, crucially, being is analogically like knowing and knowing like being. This is what makes Aquinas's theory of truth—unlike modern theories—an ontological rather than epistemological one. Indeed, the conformity or proportion which pertains between knowing and the known introduces an aesthetic dimension to knowledge utterly alien to most modern considerations.13 And, in addition, truth for Aquinas has a teleological and a practical dimension, as well as a theoretical one—that is to say, the truth of a thing is taken as that thing fulfilling the way it ought to be, being the way it must be in order to be true.14 These two dimensions of truth, as the way a thing is and the way it ought to be, come together, because for Aquinas they coincide in the Mind of God  From the very outset, then, Aquinas shows us that he does not intend to refer truth to being, as if it were at a kind of static speculative epistemological remove from being. Rather, he is asking about truth as a mode of existence. This is not, however, to suggest that truth is a particular kind of being, but rather that it is convertible with Being as such in the entirety of both terms  Such a view is, of course, fundamental to the mediaeval tradition of Aristotelianized neoplatonic convertibility of the transcendentals which assumes that Being, which is the focal transcendental, beyond all hierarchical qualifications, is equally close to every level of the metaphysical hierarchy; equally close, that is, to genus, species, substance and accident—an accident, for example, may be less self-standing than a substance, but it just as much exists as does a substance.18 So when one says that Truth is convertible with Being, one is saying that Truth is also a transcendental; that Truth, like Being, shatters the usual hierarchy of categorical priorities in such a way that the humblest creature equally shines with the one light of Truth as the most exalted, and is just as essentially disclosive of it  Now, for Aquinas, one must refer these three Augustinian determinations of Being—Being, Life and Knowledge—to one another, for together they form a circle. As a being, a thing remains in itself; as living, it opens itself through the operations of life towards others; and as known or knowing it returns from others to itself  more mysteriously still, one might say that this circle traces the mediations of a further transcendental, namely, Beauty, which seems to bestow itself obliquely on each of these three stations. Beauty, because it is to do with harmony, fittingness and proportion, including that between being and knowing, is at once invisible and hyper-visible for Aquinas; it is oblique and yet omnipresent  how does Beauty mediate? First of all, insofar as Being is something which resides in itself by a kind of integrity, Beauty is apparent as the measure of that integrity;24 secondly, insofar as Beauty is involved in the manifestation of things in their integrity, without which there could be no visibility, it is fundamental to knowledge; and thirdly, insofar as Beauty is linked with desire (Beauty being defined by Thomas as that which pleases the sight), it is crucial to the outgoings or ecstases of the will and the Good. This role of Beauty, although little explicitly averred to by Aquinas, is actually essential to grasping the character of his theory of understanding.  Beauty shows Goodness through itself and the Good leads to the True,  this sense of something immanently disclosed through something else in an unmeasurable way, but in a fashion experienced as harmonious, is precisely something aesthetic. Every judgement of truth for Aquinas is an aesthetic judgement   because Truth and Being are convertible, one with another, there is a continuity between the way things are in the external material world and the way things are in our mind.  there is a sort of parallel or analogy between the way things are in material or separated angelic substance and the way things are in our minds. It involves a real relation, whereby our thought occasions a teleological realization of the formality of things, and, in doing so, is itself brought to fruition. This realization of things is manifold and complicated (we will say more about this later), but for now let us note that it pertains to the way in which the thinking of things actually brings them to their telos. This happens, because, for Aquinas, truth is less properly in things than in mind—it is usually, as it were, a dormant power until it comes to be known, at which point the power of its truth is awakened  the very notion of a 'thing itself' is radically otherwise, for it is only 'itself' in its being conformed to the intellect of the knower, in its being ordered to a beautiful ratio or proportion. The thing-itself is only itself by being assimilated to the knower, and by its form entering into the mind of the knower.33 Truth is not 'tested' in any way, but sounds itself or shines outwards in beauty  So far, we have seen that, for Aquinas, truth is neither epistemological nor primarily a property of statements. We have seen more positively that it is convertible with Being, that it is a mode of existence and that it is related to a particular aspect of Being, which, according to our modus, is received as a kind of analogical or beautiful assimilation between things  For Aquinas the place of truth is manifold and hierarchical, and one finds it gradually by means of an ascending scale. One might begin by saying that truth is a property of things, that a thing is true if it fulfils itself and holds itself together according to its character and goal.  a thing is deemed 'less true' if it is impeded in some way from its ordinary operations, whether by poison or sickness.  If a thing is truest when it is teleologically directed, and that means when a thing is copying God, this would suggest, as Aquinas indeed affirms, that truth is primarily in the Mind of God and only secondarily in things as copying the Mind of God  when one knows a thing, one does not know that thing as it is by itself, but only insofar as one meaningfully grasps it as imitating God. How very odd this seems, for one would normally regard imitation as a secondary and therefore less authentic operation of life, but here it becomes the highest form of authenticity attainable for material things.37 However, the placing of imitation ahead of autonomy suggests that, for Aquinas, borrowing is the highest authenticity which can be attained.  truth as an idea expresses divine desire—and this is desire for the Good, which brings into our discussion a further transcendental (besides Being and Truth). Like Truth, the Good also concerns Being in its relational aspect. But whereas Truth discloses the relations between things to the intellect—all their combinations and separations—the Good discloses their relations to desire (we have already seen how this disclosure is made manifest by beauty which shows us the relations between things as desirable).  truth is also a property of all finite modes of being insofar as they participate in God. These modes include both individual material substances (such as a stone, a tree, a cricket bat) and also intellectual existences (such as human and angelic minds). This means that truth is in individual material substances and intellectual existences, not in the sense that one might point to them and say that they 'are the case', as for modern theories, but because they imitate God in their appointed modes and aim for their appointed ends. And in performing their various tasks, they analogically show us something of God  We have seen, in the third place, that truth is in the human intellect. It is there in two ways: first, following Augustine, by means of divine illumination,40 and, secondly, following Aristotle, by receiving forms as species from individual material substances  It is this third aspect of truth's being in the human intellect which returns us to what we have described as the 'aesthetic moment' in Aquinas's theory of knowledge. For when the human intellect receives into itself the species of the material substances it knows, it does not know them in the manner of an arraignment of inert facts. Rather, it must always judge or discern whether they are true to themselves.41 This means that even corresponding to finite objects is really only a corresponding to the Mind of God  the mind discerns or grasps an analogical proportion of things to God, and finds here a manifestation of the invisible in the visible.   ne finds something very strange to the modern mind; for where the latter thinks of knowledge as an abasement of subjectivity before the inertly objective, Aquinas sustains, in knowing, a delicate balance between the objective and the subjective. If one requires a beautiful appearance in order to manifest the truth, then while it is indeed the objective that is registered, this registration is only made by the subjectively informed power of rightly desiring sight and judgement. There is, indeed, a certain 'what' which pleases, but this 'what' is only acknowledged as 'pleasing'. Likewise, the invisible really does shine through the visible, and yet this is only apparent for a subtle power of discernment; it is obviously not present in the manner of a 'fact'  Since the tree only transmits treeness—indeed, only exists at all—as imitating the divine, what we receive in truth is a participation in the divine. To put this another way, in knowing a tree, we are catching it on its way back to God.43 One could even say, given the foregoing, that for Aquinas, as he indeed affirms, knowledge is God's perpetual return to Himself. This is not a movement in the sense of a discursive passage from known to unknown, but a kind of encircling, a movement out of Himself and returning to Himself, always already completed from the beginning of eternity. For God, in knowing His own essence, also knows other things in which He sees a likeness of Himself, since He grasps Himself as participable, and so He here returns to His essence  he regards our capacity for thought not as a ruefully humiliated endeavour, but as a partial receiving of divine intellection.  we only exist humanly, that is, according to a higher kind of life, exercising our intellects, by participating in Knowledge. Thus it seems that what is extra to us most defines us; here one must observe that intellection is akin to grace, because the most important part of us is in fact not part of our animal essence at all, but is super-added to us, properly and yet accidentally  Thus he speaks of God's knowledge of all the modes in which He can be participated (in this way, God knows the creation), something of which Aristotle does not speak. God knows things fully in knowing their ends, their perfection, which includes all that they are.  Thus Aquinas, like Augustine, speaks of all knowledge as intentional, as returning to concrete things that we cannot fully grasp. This concurs with the fusion of intellect as intention with desire, which returns us to things, encouraging us to learn more of them, since to intend something is also to desire to know more of the truth of the thing—this goal being regarded as a good. Thus in Aquinas, there is much more sense than with Aristotle, of knowledge as a never completed project  it turns out that we know by participation in divine knowledge; and moreover that this relation to the above is mediated by our turning to the material world below  in the foregoing, there have been several intimations that human knowledge has a self-expressive or creative dimension; not only have we seen that knowledge involves an 'aesthetic' moment whereby one must judge the beauty of a particular proportion, but also that the practice of imitation or mimesis and the exercise of imagination is not merely a passive receiving, but rather one which gathers up images and modifies them   our ideas about the essences of subordinate things proceed from ideas about the essences of higher things  When the mind understands itself, it must proceed from itself, express itself, in an intellectural word. Moreover, this emanative expression, in contrast to Aristotle, transitively proceeds, and in some ways can be seen as craft-like, as a construction or internal operation of art, insofar as the procession of the word involves a development of thought that is originally constitutive of thought, in such a way that there is no original thought without such an expressive elaboration. [This describes dialectic method]  all human knowing is to be seen as an artistic production, which again emphasizes that truth is regarded in ontological rather than epistemological terms, since it is in this way construed as an event rather than as a mirroring [THIS IS HUGE! - EVENTS MEAN HISTORY< WHICH MEANS RELATIONSHIPS ARE AESTHETIC==> TO KNOW GOD IS AN AESTHETIC EVENT]  Therefore correspondence, for Aquinas, is of what we know according to our finite modus, to God who is intrinsically far more knowable, and yet for us in His essence, utterly unknown. This means that rather than correspondence being guaranteed in its measuring of the given, as for modern notions of correspondence, it is guaranteed by its conformation to the divine source of the given. While to advance to this source is of course to advance in unknowing, it is only in terms of this unknowing, increased through faith, that we confirm even our ordinary knowing of finite things  Thus, just as for Aquinas, to correspond in knowing is to be conformed to the infinite unknown, so likewise our knowing of anything at all—however local—is in some measure an advance sight of the beatific vision, and union with the personal interplay of the Trinity            