# Milbank_Pickstock_TiA_03:  174

Nevertheless, through this intensification, the conclusion of sacra doctrina also recasts the entire character of sacra doctrina. For hitherto, Aquinas has said (from the inception of the Prima Pars) that this teaching is a science, indeed the most scientific science, because it derives its certainty from the very fount of all certainty. Nevertheless, this certainty of science is not matched by an equal certainty of derivation, since while God reveals to us something of his absolute certainty, this is only through the approximation of appropriate analogues, whose material imagery, in particular, renders them at best remote indicators. This non-demonstrative character of our modus of knowing disqualifies theology as a strictly theoretical science. In the fourth part of the Summa Contra Gentiles, however, Aquinas (already apparently anticipating the demand of the Summa Theologiae that theology, as concerning God, should be fully scientific) had already suggested that if we know the vision of God to be our true end, we must possess 'a certain foretaste' of this by faith—and that this foretaste must be 'most certain knowledge' if it is to act as 'the principle of everything ordered to the ultimate end'. In other words, to be in the truth we must orientate ourselves to absolute ontological certainty beyond our grasp, and so start with faith, and yet faith (as no longer infallibly guided since the Fall) is shaky and uncertain. To resolve this aporia and attain perfect certainty, man 'had to be instructed by God himself made man'. That is to say, for us to be able to begin to think with a kind of 'certainty', the goal of such thought had to arrive before our eyes. Aquinas cites John xi. 18: 'no man has seen God, but the only-begotten Son, he has declared him'. And for analogical reasoning to be reliable for fallen humanity, the very inappropriateness of material images had to be disclosed as, after all, in this one instance, wholly appropriate as the vehicle of truth. Aquinas therefore declares here that the materiality of the Incarnation alone renders theology a science. He repeats this point in the Tertia Pars: only the Truth incarnate founds faith.Read more at location 1758